---
title: About
layout: ../components/TextBlock.astro
---

*Disjunctions* is run by critical researchers and practitioners of science and technology. We work to author, translate, and publish work focused on today’s digital realities and the vast transformation of society brought about by various kinds of technological advances. Our focus is both practical and theoretical. We solicit content of all types—from anti-surveillance guides to subversive uses of technology, from Marxian analysis to heterodox economic theory, from theories of digital labor to anti-colonial technoscience. 

Without positing a clear break from historical capitalism, *Disjunctions* aims to create a point of convergence for work seeking to explain and unravel its specificities in the digital age. The magazine positions itself at the intersection of critical theory, technological practice, and activist praxis. Untethered to any single analytical framework, it aims to chart paths beyond technological determinism and the fetishisation of technical artifacts, towards a reality where technology serves human dignity and freedom.

We draw inspiration from the industrial-era struggles for autonomy over technological progress and the demands for knowledge concerning machines, their political economy, and their educational, social, and cultural dimensions. Given the increasingly polarised reality of techno-capitalist globalisation, we aim to center the dynamics of technological change in the global South(s) while rejecting its essentialisation as intrinsically separate or other. This includes a focus on both domestic variants of technoscientific capitalism, and the relationships between the North and the South. Against the shadow of a looming global techno-monopoly, we borrow from Salvador Allende’s struggle to democratize technology, highlighting the agency of subjects in the global South and worldwide to create, subvert, and repurpose technology in the way that best serves their collective liberation.
